ML-based row-level anomaly detection (#990)
databrickslabs/dqx: docs/dqx/docs/reference/quality_checks.mdx

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Anomaly Detection

> Detect unusual rows by learning what "normal" looks like across multiple columns, then flagging rows that deviate. Train on recent "good" data so the check learns typical ranges and combinations (e.g., amount and quantity together), not just single-column thresholds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Detects unusual rows by learning what "normal" looks like across multiple columns, then flags rows that deviate. Train on recent "good" data so the check learns typical ranges and combinations (e.g., amount and quantity together), not just single-column thresholds.
```

**Current algorithm**: IsolationForest (Spark ML, requires Spark ≥ 3.5 / DBR ≥ 15.4). Future releases may add additional algorithms behind the same interface.

### DQX + Databricks: Complementary Anomaly Detection

DQX's row-level anomaly detection **complements** [Databricks native anomaly detection](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/databricks/data-quality-monitoring/anomaly-detection/) for comprehensive data quality monitoring:

| **Aspect** | **Databricks Native** | **DQX Anomaly Detection** | **Use Together** |
|------------|----------------------|---------------------------|------------------|
| **Scope** | Table-level monitoring (freshness, row counts) | Row-level multivariate patterns | ✅ Monitor both pipeline health AND data content quality |
| **What it detects** | Late updates, missing data batches | Unusual individual records, cross-column anomalies | ✅ Catch both systemic issues AND data quality problems |
| **Setup** | Enable on schema, automatic | Train model on columns, apply as DQX check | ✅ Schema-level + table-specific checks |

> | **Typical use** | "Is my pipeline running?" | "Are these rows valid?" | ✅ Full pipeline + data validation |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Typical use** | "Is my pipeline producing data?" | "Are these rows valid?" | ✅ Data availability + validation |
```

**Example: Using both together**

```python
# 1. Enable Databricks native monitoring (schema-level, automatic)
#    Monitors: table freshness, row count completeness
#    Setup: Enable in Unity Catalog UI for your schema

# 2. Add DQX row-level anomaly detection (table-specific)
from databricks.labs.dqx.anomaly import train, has_no_anomalies

# Train on "good" transaction data
train(
    df=spark.table("catalog.schema.transactions"),
    columns=["amount", "quantity", "discount"],
)

# Apply as DQX check
checks = [
    has_no_anomalies(
        columns=["amount", "quantity", "discount"],
        score_threshold=0.5,
    )
]
# → Flags individual suspicious transactions
# → While Databricks native ensures table arrives on time
```

**Why train a model?**
- Static rules miss unlikely combinations (e.g., amount is fine, discount is fine, but together they're abnormal).

> - Patterns drift over time; training on recent data adapts to what's normal now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Patterns drift over time; (re-)training on recent data adapts to what's normal now.
```

**What it catches that other checks miss**
- Multivariate anomalies: values that look fine alone but are unlikely together (e.g., heavy discount with very high amount).
- Subtle shifts: gradual distribution changes that fall outside learned norms.
- Cross-feature inconsistencies: correlated fields no longer moving together.

**Example scenarios**
- Transactions: unusually high amount + low quantity + odd discount.
- Logistics: weight and dimensions that don't match historical norms.
- Metrics: sudden change in correlated KPIs (requests vs. errors) even if each is in-range.

> **Python**

Reviewer: Can we spearate this. We are mixing up training and checks definition. We need to explain that user must train the model before using the check.

We should have section on:
* model training: code and workflow approach
* check definition: programmatic and YAML

  - name: orders
    input_config:
      location: catalog.schema.orders
    anomaly_config:
      columns: [amount, quantity, shipping_cost]
      # optional overrides:
      # params:
      #   sample_fraction: 0.3
      #   max_rows: 1000000
      #   train_ratio: 0.8
      #   algorithm_config:
      #     contamination: 0.1
      #     num_trees: 200

# checks.yml
- criticality: warn
  check:
    function: has_no_anomalies
    arguments:
      columns: [amount, quantity, shipping_cost]
      score_threshold: 0.5
```

**Score thresholds**
- 0.3 aggressive, 0.5 balanced (default), 0.7 conservative, 0.9 very conservative.

**Parameters**
- `columns`: Columns to check for anomalies.
- `model`: Model name (auto-derived if omitted).
- `registry_table`: Registry table (auto-derived if omitted).
- `score_threshold`: Anomaly score threshold (default 0.5).
- `row_filter`: Optional SQL expression to filter rows before scoring.
- `merge_columns`: Columns for joining scored results back (default: all columns).
  - **Performance tip**: Provide primary key columns when using `row_filter` for faster joins.
  - Example: `merge_columns=["order_id"]` instead of joining on all 50 columns.

> - `drift_threshold`: Drift detection threshold (default 3.0, `None` to disable).

Reviewer: we should shortly explain what it means

- Rows with nulls in anomaly columns are skipped (not flagged).
- When `row_filter` is used, all original rows are preserved; non-filtered rows have `null` scores.
- Fails fast if Spark < 3.5 / DBR < 15.4.

### Advanced Features

**Model Performance Metrics**

After training, the model registry stores comprehensive validation metrics:
- Precision, recall, and F1 scores at multiple thresholds (0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9)
- Recommended threshold based on F1-optimal balance
- Distribution statistics (mean, std, skewness, percentiles)
- Estimated contamination rate

Query the registry table to view metrics:
```sql
SELECT model_name, metrics, feature_importance, training_time
FROM catalog.schema.dqx_anomaly_models
WHERE status = 'active'
ORDER BY training_time DESC
```

**Feature Contributions (Explainability)**

Add `include_contributions=True` to understand which columns drove each anomaly score:

```python
from databricks.labs.dqx.anomaly import has_no_anomalies

checks = [
    has_no_anomalies(
        columns=["amount", "quantity", "discount"],
        score_threshold=0.5,
        include_contributions=True,  # adds 'anomaly_contributions' column
    )
]
```

> Output includes `anomaly_contributions` map showing per-feature contribution percentages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When contributions are enabled (default) the `_dq_info` column includes `anomaly_contributions` map showing per-feature contribution percentages.
```

**Drift Detection**

Automatically detects when current data distribution differs significantly from training data:

```python
from databricks.labs.dqx.anomaly import has_no_anomalies

checks = [
    has_no_anomalies(
        columns=["amount", "quantity"],

>         drift_threshold=3.0,  # Z-score threshold (default 3.0)

Reviewer: should we explain what this means? why 3.0?
